principles: if a T-term is in the set L, for example [a // b], then decode it as
the number (a - b) on the left-hand side of the equation, while if [a // b] is
in the set R, decode it as (b - a) on the right-hand side of the equation. This
procedure will always produce a valid equation given a zero-term.
Naturally in bookkeeping the T-accounts in the nal equational zero-term
would be put in the sets L and R according to the side of the initial balance
sheet equation from which the accounts were originally encoded.
The last thing to underline about this second main feature of the double
entry bookkeeping method is that while the rst one, seen before, allowed to
describe positive and negative quantities in terms only of positive numbers, in
the case of the zero-terms or the equivalent equations into or from which they are
translated, they provide an instant checking for the validity of the transaction
they are referring to, as we are going to see in this next section.

2.2

Conclusions and remarks on the main features of the
double entry bookkeeping system mathematical framework

The two main features of the double entry bookkeeping system mathematical
framework, that Ellerman has identied, are probably at the basis of the method
success. As a matter of fact they give to the user of the system two very useful
benets, especially from the point of view of the historical period in which it
was invented as well as, at least, the rst four centuries of its use.
The Pacioli group gives the opportunity to express the whole accounting of
the rm, positive as well as negative ows of wealth, only through the use of
positive numbers, which especially in the 15th century when the system was devised, was denitely a positive thing. Let's see more in detail this characteristic
with a very simple exemplication. We have a balance sheet where the simplest
of the balance sheet equations is updated:

Assets = Liabilities + N etW orth

and where we do not have temporary or ow accounts such as revenues
or expenses, so basically we do not have a prot and loss statement. In this
situation we will have only three accounting items, namely Assets, Liabilities
and NetWorth, to which T-terms will refer that, having attached the accounting
labels Assets, etc., from now on can properly be called T-accounts. It is the
position of the account in the all-positive equation above that identies the
14

account as a left-hand side (LHS) or debit-balance account or as a right-hand
side (RHS) or credit-balance account. Now in general debiting any x to an
account means adding the debit T-term [x // 0] to the T-account, while crediting
x to an account means adding the credit T-term [0 // x] to the T-account.
It is a common mistake of non-accountants to think that debit means negative. But it all depends if the account is a LHS account or a RHS account, which,
as in our case, can be easily assessed looking at the balance sheet equation. As
a matter of fact to debit an account does not necessarily mean to subtract from
the balance in the account, that is only true for credit-balance accounts, debiting
a debit-balance account, like in our case Assets, means adding to the account's
balance.
The second feature of the double entry bookkeeping system, the fact that the
zero-term representation of the balance sheet equilibrium equation, gives a quick
check of the plausibility of the transaction, for each transaction, is even more
important. It remains very useful today in the everyday accounting practice,
and it was denitely more so in a period when there were no computers or
electronic calculators especially in relation to the recording of a high number of
transactions.
Of course this checking opportunity would be present in any kind of transaction recording method that would be based on updating a complete accounting
equation, since the double entry system is a system of recording transactions,
but its feature relating to the zero-term encoding of equations makes it immediate after some practice. For example if, in relation to the above balance sheet,
an event was formulated as the transaction of adding 200 $ to both Liabilities
and NetWorth, some thought would be required to see that this formulation of
a business event could not possibly be correct and much more would be required
for a multiple entry transaction in an accounting system with a lot of accounts.
Yet the check is immediate in the double entry system, Liabilities and NetWorth
are both credit-balance accounts so the proposed transaction is a double credit
transaction in violation of the double entry principle.

3 From the double entry bookkeeping system to
a linear algebra modelization of the balance
sheet dynamics
So far we have seen the characteristics of the double entry bookkeeping system
mathematical framework, now let's approach the linear algebra modelization of
the balance sheet dynamics and establish how the features previously discussed
can be modied in order to achieve dierent goals.
15

We can summarize this approach presenting an example by a work of Arya
et al. (2004) in which he states, among other things, that the dynamics of a
balance sheet representation can be modeled through an ane transformation.
Let's consider a balance sheet that has all its accounting items at zero at
the beginning of the period and then is subjected to the following transactions.
Equipment is purchased for $80, let the depreciation expense be $20, the stock
is sold for $100, and cash revenue is $30.
The Balance sheet at the end of the period will be the following:
Assets
Cash
Equipment

50
80

Assets

130

Liabilities
Acc. Depreciation
Capital Stock
Income
Liabilities + Equity

20
100
10
130

We are in an accounting situation that can be modeled as follows. We can
dene a Balance sheet vector with the above accounting items, each one having
value 0 at the beginning of the period

[Cash0 , Equipment0 , Acc. Depreciation0 , Capital Stock0 ] =

[0,

0,

0,

0 ]

−
→

and we can dene a vector of transactions C1 (expressing the transactions
taking place from the time step 0 to the time step 1) with values as above
(equipment purchased for $80, depreciation expense of $20, stock sold for $100,
cash revenue of $30) namely

−
→ 
C1 = ca1 ,

cb1 ,

cc1 ,

cd1



=



80,

20,

100,

30



So at the end of the accounting period the Balance sheet vector will be:























Cash1 = −(Cash0 + ca1 ) + (Acc. Depreciation0 + cc1 )+
+(Capital Stock0 + cd1 ) =
= −(0 + ca1 ) + (0 + cc1 ) + 0 + (cd1 ) =
= −80 + 10 + 30 = 50
Equipment1 = (Cash0 + ca1 ) = (0 + ca1 ) = 80
Acc. Depreciation1 = (Equipment0 + cb1 ) = (0 + cb1 ) = 20
Capital Stock1 = (Acc. Depreciation0 + cc1 ) = (0 + cc1 ) = 100

16

Naturally a system of rst order linear dierence equations can be expressed
through a matrix representation. So considering the Balance sheet vector at the
beginning of the period and the vector of transactions dened above, through
the action of the following accounting matrix the Balance sheet vector at the
end of the accounting period will be:

 
−1
Cash1
  1
 Equipment1
 Acc. Depreciation =  0
1
0
Capital Stock1


0
0
1
0

1
0
0
1


 

50
0 + 80
1
0  0 + 20   80 
0  0 + 100   20 
100
0 + 30
0

=

Basically we have just established that we can generally formalize the dynamics of the balance sheet mathematically as follows:

Sn = f (Sn−1 , Cn )

where Sn is the vector of the balance sheet items at time n, Cn represents
the vector of the economic and nancial transactions occurring (or recorded)
between time (n − 1) and time n, and f is a linear ane function on both
arguments.
Expressing the function above through a matrix representation, applied to
the previous example, we will have:

 
Cashn
 Equipmentn
 
 Acc. Depreciation = 
n
Capital Stockn


m1,1
m2,1
m3,1
m4,1

m1,2
m2,2
m3,2
m4,2

m1,3
m2,3
m3,3
m4,3



m1,4
Cashn−1 + can
m2,4 
Equipmentn−1 + cbn

m3,4  Acc. Depreciationn−1 + ccn 
m4,4
Capital Stockn−1 + cdn

In the example above we have built the balance sheet vector using only
four accounting items, but in general we could theoretically choose as much
accounting items as we need for the particular formalization that we have in
mind.
Now the rst thing that we have to underline, in the formalization that
we have just presented, is that we have already modied one of the two main
characteristics of the double entry mathematical framework, and rightfully so,
17

